# Prologue

There are tons of resources around the Internet about how to create and edit stuff for the Q3A mapping applications. The same happens with the mapping tools, there are many of them scattered around the 'net.

Likewise, although the main mapping applications for OA share the same functionality, they tend to behave differently regarding certain functions. In one editor, a specific function may or may not appear, while another would be executed in a different form from editor to editor.

This manual aims to compile and resume all of the knowledge about these tools onto a single place. It may be based on a set of tools, but the skills learnt here should apply as well to the other tools. All of the other available tools for OA mapping are covered in the Appendix D.

## A bit of history

In 1999, [Id Software](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Id_Software) released *Quake III Arena*, a multiplayer-exclusive chronological follow-up to *[Quake II](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quake_II)* (1998), and it became one of the most iconic games ever. It shared the multiplayer-exclusive focus with its long time rival *[Unreal Tournament](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unreal_Tournament)*, from [Epic Games](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epic_Games), also released that year, and over a long time both franchises set a precedent in the multiplayer ground.

In 2001, Id Software released *Quake III: Team Arena*, the teamplay-focused expansion pack for Q3A, to a lukewarm reception.

In 2005, Id Software releases the Source Code of the *Quake III* engine, IdTech3. Although the source code of the game was released, assets such as maps and characters were still under restrictive licenses. Thus, the *OpenArena* project began.

Over the course of 8+ years, OA grew up and became one of the most iconic FPS in the Free Software field, while staying true to its roots.

## The mapping tools

In 1996, with the release of *Quake*, Armin Rigo wrote a mapping program called *Quakemap*. This first editor initially supported only *Quake* map edition, but it was later expanded to support *Quake II* maps, as well as models, sounds and compiled *Quake* maps. By 1998,it also added Python support for plugins, and was renamed as *QuArK*, short for *Quake Army Knife*. The last final version of *QuArK* was 6.3, and was released on January 2003, with many posterior alpha and beta releases following.

Earlier than *Quakemap*, however, Id Software used their own set of tools on the NeXTSTEP platform. These tools included the map editor *QuakeEd*, the original map editor for *Quake*. Some years later, there was another editor, called *QE4*, used for *Quake II* and released with the *Quake II* SDK. Robert Duffy used the source code of *QE4* in order to develop *QERadiant*. This code was later used by Id Software to develop *Q3Radiant*, the level design tool for *Quake III Arena*.

Up to this point, all of the mentioned tools were available only for Windows systems.

In 2001, a modification of *Q3Radiant* called *GtkRadiant* was released, with two major changes: it used the GTK+ toolkit in order to also support the Linux and Mac operating systems, and was game engine-independent, meaning that people could use the editor for new games with the addition of gamepacks. Timothee "TTimo" Besset, responsible for the post-release Linux ports of *Quake III Arena* and much of the network programming, was hired to maintain this game editor. This is the first editor released as free software, distributed under the GNU GPL license, with the source code being available at the Id Software's Subversion repositories. However, the code had a dual license where the new added code was GPL and the core *Q3Radiant* code (which used parts of Q3A's code) was Id Software's property, which made development difficult and inhibited the use of the editor in commercial projects.

When the *Quake III* source code was released, the *Q3Radiant* source code was also released with it, and the full licensing for both the *GtkRadiant* editor and toolset (notable *Q3Map2*, the BSP compiler) was changed in February 2006 and publicly released under the GPL on February 17.

Some of *GtkRadiant*'s most prominent forks include:

* *NetRadiant*: a *GtkRadiant 1.5* fork made by Alientrap Games, the people behind Nexuiz.
* *DarkRadiant*: a 1.5 fork optimized for games made in the idTech 4 engine (*Quake IV*, *Doom III*, *Enemy Territory: Quake Wars*, etc...)
* *ZeroRadiant*: codename for the official *GtkRadiant 1.6* editor, which is used for (and maintained by) many of Id Software's newer games.
